\input texinfo
@c %** start of header
@setfilename enfuse-focus-stacking.info
@settitle Focus Stacking with Enfuse
@c %** end of header


@c
@c Summary Description and Copyright
@c

@copying
This file describes how to use @command{enfuse} to produce so-called
focus-stacks of sets of aligned images.

Copyright @copyright{} 2008 Dr. Christoph L. Spiel

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the @acronym{GNU} Free Documentation License,
Version@tie{}1.2 or any later version published by the Free Software
Foundation; with no Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts and no
Back-Cover Texts.  A copy of the license is included in the section
entitled ``@acronym{GNU} Free Documentation License''.
@end quotation
@end copying



@c
@c Title Page and Copyright
@c
@titlepage
@sp 10
@center @titlefont{Focus Stacking with Enfuse}

@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1fill
Copyright @copyright{} 2008 Dr. Christoph L. Spiel
@end titlepage


@c
@c ``Top'' Node and Master Menu
@c

@ifinfo
@node Top, Focus stacks, (dir), (dir)
@top Focus Stacking with Enfuse

...
@end ifinfo

@menu
* Focus stacks::                Why create focus stacks?
* Preparing the Images::        What to look out for when praparing images for fusing
* Contrased-Based Fusing::      How to invoke @command{enfuse} when building a focus stack
* Getting Maximum Contrast::    How to get the most contrast out of your images
* Basic Usage::                 Focus stacking the quick and easy way
* Advanced Usage::              Focus stacking with difficult images
* FDL::                         @acronym{GNU} Free Documentation License
* Concept Index::               Index
@end menu


@c
@c Document Body
@c

@node Focus stacks, Preparing the Images, Top, Top
@section Why create focus stacks?

Given
@itemize @bullet
@item
a fixed sensor or film size,
@item
a particular focal length, and
@item
a notion about ``sharpness'', technically speaking the
circle-of-confusion (@acronym{CoC})
@end itemize
the photographer controls the depth-of-field (@acronym{DOF}) with the
aperture.  Smaller apertures -- this is larger aperture numbers --
increase the @acronym{DOF} and vice versa.  However, smaller apertures
increase diffraction which in turn renders the image unsharp.  So,
there is an optimum aperture where the photographer gets maximum
@acronym{DOF}.  Sadly, for some purposes like macro shots it is not
enough.  One way out is to combine the sharp parts of images focussed
at different distances thereby artifically increasing the total
@acronym{DOF}.  This is exactly what @command{enfuse} can do.

All lenses have a so called ''sweet spot'' aperture where their
resolution is best.  Taking pictures at this aperture gets the maximum
quality out of the lens.  But: the ''sweet spot'' aperture often is
only one or two stops away from wide open.  Wouldn't it be great to be
able combine these best-possible images to form one high-quality,
sufficient-@acronym{DOF} image?  Welcome to @command{enfuse}'s
contrast selection abilities.


@node Preparing the Images, Contrased-Based Fusing, Focus stacks, Top
@section Preparing the Images

We are going to combine images with limited @acronym{DOF} to increase
their in-focus parts.  The whole process is about image sharpness.
Therefore, the input images must align very well, not just well, but
very well.  For optimum results the maximum controlpoint distance in
Hugin should not exceed 0.3 to 0.5 pixels to ensure perfect blending.

As in all image fusion operations it is preferable to use 16-bit
linear (gamma = 1) images throughout, but 8-bit gamma encoded images
will do.  Naturally, high signal-to-noise ratio (@acronym{SNR}) input
data always is welcome.


@node Contrased-Based Fusing, Getting Maximum Contrast, Preparing the Images, Top
@section Contrased-Based Fusing

A bare bones call to Enfuse for focus stacking could look like this.

@example
enfuse \
    --wExposure=0 \
    --wSaturation=0 \
    --wContrast=1 \
    --HardMask \
    ... \
    -o output.tif \
    input-<0000-9999>.tif
@end example

@table @option
@item --wExposure=0
Switch off exposure based pixel selection.

@item --wSaturation=0
Switch off saturation based pixel selection.

@item --wContrast=1
Switch on pixel selection based on contrast.

@item --HardMask
Select the best pixel from the image stack and ignore all others.
Without this option Enfuse uses all pixels in the stack and weights
them according to their respective quality, which in our case would be
contrast.  Without @option{--HardMask} the result will always look a
bit soft.
@end table

If you want to see some entertaining progress messages, also pass the
@option{-v}-option ("verbose").


@node Getting Maximum Contrast, Basic Usage, Contrased-Based Fusing, Top
@section Getting Maximum Contrast

Enfuse converts every image to grayscale before it determines its
contrast.  Depending on the subject one of several grayscale
projectors may yield the best black-and-white contrast for image
fusion.  Therefore, Enfuse offers the user different conversion
operators to convert from the three color channels R, G, and B to a
luminance measure Y.

The @option{--GrayProjector} option has no influence on
black-and-white images.

@table @samp
@item average
Average red, green, and blue channel with equal weights.  This is the
default and it often is a good projector for @math{gamma = 1} data.
@example
        Y = (R + G + B) / 3
@end example

@item l-star
Use the L*-channel of the L*a*b*-conversion of the image as its
grayscale representation.  This is a useful projector for @math{gamma
= 1} data.  It reveals minute contrast variations even in the shadows
and the highlights.  This projector is computationally expensive.

@item lightness
Compute the lightness of each RGB-pixel as in an HSL-conversion of the
image.
@example
Y = (max(R, G, B) + min(R, G, B)) / 2
@end example

@item value
Take the Value-channel of the HSV-conversion of the image.
@example
Y = max(R, G, B)
@end example

@item luminance
Use the weighted average of the RGB pixel's channels as defined by
@acronym{CIE} and the @acronym{JPEG} standard.
@example
Y = 0.30 * R + 0.59 * G + 0.11 * B
@end example

@item channel-mixer:RedWeight:GreenWeight:BlueWeight
Weight the channels as given.
@example
Y = RedWeight * R + GreenWeight * G + BlueWeight * B
@end example
The weights are automatically normalized to one, so
@example
--GrayProjector=channel-mixer:0.25:0.5:0.25
--GrayProjector=channel-mixer:1:2:1
--GrayProjector=channel-mixer:25:50:25
@end example
all define the same mixer configuration.
@end table


@node Basic Usage, Advanced Usage, Getting Maximum Contrast, Top
@section Basic Usage -- Quick and Easy

For a large set of image stacks @command{enfuse}s default algorithm to
determine the sharpness produces nice results.  The algorithm uses a
moving square window, the so called contrast window.  It computes the
standard deviation of the pixels inside of the window.  The program
then selects the window's center pixel of the image in the stack where
the standard deviation is largest, this is the contrast is maximized.

@table @option
@item --ContrastWindowSize=5
    Specifiy the edge length of the square Enfuse uses to determine
    the local contrast.  The above option instructs Enfuse to look at
    the surrounding 24 pixels ("24-connectivity") of the center pixel
    when selecting the most contrasty proximity.

    Given an even size Enfuse will always choose the next larger odd
    number for the edge length.  Sizes 5, 7, 9, and 11 are good
    starting values for ContrastWindowSize.  Larger values increase
    the computational burden.
@end table

The algorithm fails to deliver good masks for images which exhibit
high contrast edges on the scale of the contrast window size.  The
typical artifacts that show up are
@itemize @bullet
@item
faint dark seams on the light side of the high contrast edges and
@item
extremely soft, slighly lighter seams on the dark side of the high
contrast edges,
@end itemize
where the distance of the seams from the middle of the edge is
comparable to the same as the contrast window size.

If your fused image shows any of these defects you can try a more
difficult to use algorithm that effecticely works around the seam
artifacts.  It is described in the next section.


@node Advanced Usage,  , Basic Usage, Top
@section Advanced Usage

@menu
* Detailed Look at the Problem::  
* Combine --EdgeScale::         
* Local Contrast Enhancement::  
* Suppressing Noise or Recognizing Faint Edges::  
* Understanding Mask Files::    
@end menu


@node Detailed Look at the Problem, Combine --EdgeScale, Advanced Usage, Advanced Usage
@subsection Detailed Look at the Problem

Here is an example to illustrate the problem of relating the sharpness
with the local contrast variations.  Say we use a 5x5 contrast window.
Let @samp{sharp_edge} and @samp{smooth_edge} be two specific
configurations.

@example
    sharp_edge =  #(    0,    0,  200,    0,    0;
                        0,  225,    0,    0,    0;
                        0,  255,    0,    0,    0;
                      215,    0,    0,    0,    0;
                      200,    0,    0,    0,    0)
@end example

@example
    smooth_edge = #(    0,   62,  125,  187,  250;
                        1,   63,  126,  188,  251;
                        2,   65,  127,  190,  252;
                        3,   66,  128,  191,  253;
                        5,   67,  130,  192,  255)
@end example

Our intuition lets us ''see'' an extremely sharp edge in the first
matrix, whereas the second one describes an extraordinarily smooth
diagonal intensity ramp.  Which one will be selected?  Well,
@samp{sharp_edge} has a standard deviation of 88.071335 and
@samp{smooth_edge} has 88.406190.  So smooth_edge wins contradicting
out intuition and even worse our intention!


@node Combine --EdgeScale, Local Contrast Enhancement, Detailed Look at the Problem, Advanced Usage
@subsection Combine --EdgeScale, --MinGradient, and --ContrastWindowSize

@command{enfuse} provides a Laplacian-based algorithm that can help in
situations like this.  It is activated with a positive value for
EdgeDetectScale in the option
@option{--EdgeScale}=@var{EdgeDetectScale} The Laplacian detects
curvature on the scale of @option{EdgeDetectScale}.  Typically
@option{EdgeDetectScale} will range between 0.1 and 0.5, where 0.3 is
a good starting point.

To find the best value for EdgeDetectScale some experimentation will
be necessary.  If necessary, use the @option{--debug}-option to get
all @file{mask####.tif} and @file{mask####_wta.tif} files (See next
subsection for an explanation of their use.) and check them for
artifacts.

Here and in the following we simply speak of ''curvature'' where we
mean ''magnitude of curvature''.  This is, we shall not distinguish
between convex and concave edges.


@node Local Contrast Enhancement, Suppressing Noise or Recognizing Faint Edges, Combine --EdgeScale, Advanced Usage
@subsection Local Contrast Enhancement

Sometimes Enfuse misses smoother edges with --EdgeScale and a little
Local Contrast Enhancement (@acronym{LCE}) helps:
@option{--EdgeScale}=@var{EdgeDetectScale}:@var{LCE-Scale}:@var{LCE-Factor}
where @var{LCE-Scale} and @var{LCE-Factor} work like the Unsharp Mask
filters in various image manipulation programs.  To start use for
@var{LCE-Scale} ten times the value of @var{EdgeDetectScale} and use
an @var{LCE-Factor} of 2 to 5.

@var{LCE-Scale} can be specified as a percentage of @var{EdgeDetectScale}.
@var{LCE-Factor} can be specified as a pertentage.  Examples:
@example
    --EdgeScale=0.3:3.0:3
    --EdgeScale=0.3:1000%:3.0
    --EdgeScale=0.3:3:300%
    --EdgeScale=0.3:1000%:300%
@end example
By default LCE is turned off.


@node Suppressing Noise or Recognizing Faint Edges, Understanding Mask Files, Local Contrast Enhancement, Advanced Usage
@subsection Suppressing Noise or Recognizing Faint Edgesa

The Laplacian-based algorithm resists much better the seam problem
than the local-contrast algorithm, but it has two shortcomings:
@enumerate
@item
The Laplacian is very susceptible to noise.
@item
It fails to recognize faint edges.
@end enumerate
The @option{--MinCurvature} option helps to mitigate both flaws.

The argument to @option{--MinCurvature} either is an absolute lightness value
(0..255 for 8-bit data and 0..65535 for 16-bit data) or, when given
with a @samp{%}-sign it is a relative lightness value (0%..100%).

To suppress unreal edges or counter excessive noise use the
@option{--MinCurvature} option with a @emph{negative} curvature measure
@var{C}.  This forces all curvatures less than -@var{C} to zero.
@option{--EdgeScale} is @emph{not} used.

A @emph{positive} curvature measure @var{C} makes @command{enfuse}
merge the @acronym{LoG} data with the local-contrast data.  Every
curvature larger or equal to @var{C} is left unchanged and every
curvature less than @var{C} gets replaced by the rescaled
local-contrast data such that the largest local contrast is just below
@var{C}.  This combines the best parts of both techniques and ensures
a precise edge detection over the whole range of edge curvatures.


@node Understanding Mask Files,  , Suppressing Noise or Recognizing Faint Edges, Advanced Usage
@subsection Understanding Mask Files

mask####.tif and mask####_wta.tif files

@example
    convert -normalize mask0000.tif | display -
@end example


@c
@c GNU Free Documentation License
@c

@node FDL, Concept Index, Top, Top
@appendix @acronym{GNU} Free Documentation License
@cindex @acronym{FDL}
@cindex @acronym{GNU} Free Documentation License

Version 1.2, November 2002

@display
Copyright @copyright{} 2000, 2001, 2002 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
51 Franklin St, Fifth Floor, Boston, MA  02110-1301, USA

Everyone is permitted to copy and distribute verbatim copies
of this license document, but changing it is not allowed.
@end display

@enumerate 0
@item
PREAMBLE

The purpose of this License is to make a manual, textbook, or other
functional and useful document @dfn{free} in the sense of freedom: to
assure everyone the effective freedom to copy and redistribute it,
with or without modifying it, either commercially or noncommercially.
Secondarily, this License preserves for the author and publisher a way
to get credit for their work, while not being considered responsible
for modifications made by others.

This License is a kind of ``copyleft'', which means that derivative
works of the document must themselves be free in the same sense.  It
complements the @acronym{GNU} General Public License, which is a
copyleft license designed for free software.

We have designed this License in order to use it for manuals for free
software, because free software needs free documentation: a free
program should come with manuals providing the same freedoms that the
software does.  But this License is not limited to software manuals;
it can be used for any textual work, regardless of subject matter or
whether it is published as a printed book.  We recommend this License
principally for works whose purpose is instruction or reference.

@item
APPLICABILITY AND DEFINITIONS

This License applies to any manual or other work, in any medium, that
contains a notice placed by the copyright holder saying it can be
distributed under the terms of this License.  Such a notice grants a
world-wide, royalty-free license, unlimited in duration, to use that
work under the conditions stated herein.  The ``Document'', below,
refers to any such manual or work.  Any member of the public is a
licensee, and is addressed as ``you''.  You accept the license if you
copy, modify or distribute the work in a way requiring permission
under copyright law.

A ``Modified Version'' of the Document means any work containing the
Document or a portion of it, either copied verbatim, or with
modifications and/or translated into another language.

A ``Secondary Section'' is a named appendix or a front-matter section
of the Document that deals exclusively with the relationship of the
publishers or authors of the Document to the Document's overall
subject (or to related matters) and contains nothing that could fall
directly within that overall subject.  (Thus, if the Document is in
part a textbook of mathematics, a Secondary Section may not explain
any mathematics.)  The relationship could be a matter of historical
connection with the subject or with related matters, or of legal,
commercial, philosophical, ethical or political position regarding
them.

The ``Invariant Sections'' are certain Secondary Sections whose titles
are designated, as being those of Invariant Sections, in the notice
that says that the Document is released under this License.  If a
section does not fit the above definition of Secondary then it is not
allowed to be designated as Invariant.  The Document may contain zero
Invariant Sections.  If the Document does not identify any Invariant
Sections then there are none.

The ``Cover Texts'' are certain short passages of text that are
listed, as Front-Cover Texts or Back-Cover Texts, in the notice that
says that the Document is released under this License.  A Front-Cover
Text may be at most 5 words, and a Back-Cover Text may be at most 25
words.

A ``Transparent'' copy of the Document means a machine-readable copy,
represented in a format whose specification is available to the
general public, that is suitable for revising the document
straightforwardly with generic text editors or (for images composed of
pixels) generic paint programs or (for drawings) some widely available
drawing editor, and that is suitable for input to text formatters or
for automatic translation to a variety of formats suitable for input
to text formatters.  A copy made in an otherwise Transparent file
format whose markup, or absence of markup, has been arranged to thwart
or discourage subsequent modification by readers is not Transparent.
An image format is not Transparent if used for any substantial amount
of text.  A copy that is not ``Transparent'' is called ``Opaque''.

Examples of suitable formats for Transparent copies include plain
@sc{ascii} without markup, Texinfo input format, La@TeX{} input
format, @acronym{SGML} or @acronym{XML} using a publicly available
@acronym{DTD}, and standard-conforming simple @acronym{HTML},
PostScript or @acronym{PDF} designed for human modification.  Examples
of transparent image formats include @acronym{PNG}, @acronym{XCF} and
@acronym{JPG}.  Opaque formats include proprietary formats that can be
read and edited only by proprietary word processors, @acronym{SGML} or
@acronym{XML} for which the @acronym{DTD} and/or processing tools are
not generally available, and the machine-generated @acronym{HTML},
PostScript or @acronym{PDF} produced by some word processors for
output purposes only.

The ``Title Page'' means, for a printed book, the title page itself,
plus such following pages as are needed to hold, legibly, the material
this License requires to appear in the title page.  For works in
formats which do not have any title page as such, ``Title Page'' means
the text near the most prominent appearance of the work's title,
preceding the beginning of the body of the text.

A section ``Entitled XYZ'' means a named subunit of the Document whose
title either is precisely XYZ or contains XYZ in parentheses following
text that translates XYZ in another language.  (Here XYZ stands for a
specific section name mentioned below, such as ``Acknowledgements'',
``Dedications'', ``Endorsements'', or ``History''.)  To ``Preserve the
Title'' of such a section when you modify the Document means that it
remains a section ``Entitled XYZ'' according to this definition.

The Document may include Warranty Disclaimers next to the notice which
states that this License applies to the Document.  These Warranty
Disclaimers are considered to be included by reference in this
License, but only as regards disclaiming warranties: any other
implication that these Warranty Disclaimers may have is void and has
no effect on the meaning of this License.

@item
VERBATIM COPYING

You may copy and distribute the Document in any medium, either
commercially or noncommercially, provided that this License, the
copyright notices, and the license notice saying this License applies
to the Document are reproduced in all copies, and that you add no
other conditions whatsoever to those of this License.  You may not use
technical measures to obstruct or control the reading or further
copying of the copies you make or distribute.  However, you may accept
compensation in exchange for copies.  If you distribute a large enough
number of copies you must also follow the conditions in section 3.

You may also lend copies, under the same conditions stated above, and
you may publicly display copies.

@item
COPYING IN QUANTITY

If you publish printed copies (or copies in media that commonly have
printed covers) of the Document, numbering more than 100, and the
Document's license notice requires Cover Texts, you must enclose the
copies in covers that carry, clearly and legibly, all these Cover
Texts: Front-Cover Texts on the front cover, and Back-Cover Texts on
the back cover.  Both covers must also clearly and legibly identify
you as the publisher of these copies.  The front cover must present
the full title with all words of the title equally prominent and
visible.  You may add other material on the covers in addition.
Copying with changes limited to the covers, as long as they preserve
the title of the Document and satisfy these conditions, can be treated
as verbatim copying in other respects.

If the required texts for either cover are too voluminous to fit
legibly, you should put the first ones listed (as many as fit
reasonably) on the actual cover, and continue the rest onto adjacent
pages.

If you publish or distribute Opaque copies of the Document numbering
more than 100, you must either include a machine-readable Transparent
copy along with each Opaque copy, or state in or with each Opaque copy
a computer-network location from which the general network-using
public has access to download using public-standard network protocols
a complete Transparent copy of the Document, free of added material.
If you use the latter option, you must take reasonably prudent steps,
when you begin distribution of Opaque copies in quantity, to ensure
that this Transparent copy will remain thus accessible at the stated
location until at least one year after the last time you distribute an
Opaque copy (directly or through your agents or retailers) of that
edition to the public.

It is requested, but not required, that you contact the authors of the
Document well before redistributing any large number of copies, to
give them a chance to provide you with an updated version of the
Document.

@item
MODIFICATIONS

You may copy and distribute a Modified Version of the Document under
the conditions of sections 2 and 3 above, provided that you release
the Modified Version under precisely this License, with the Modified
Version filling the role of the Document, thus licensing distribution
and modification of the Modified Version to whoever possesses a copy
of it.  In addition, you must do these things in the Modified Version:

@enumerate A
@item
Use in the Title Page (and on the covers, if any) a title distinct
from that of the Document, and from those of previous versions (which
should, if there were any, be listed in the History section of the
Document).  You may use the same title as a previous version if the
original publisher of that version gives permission.

@item
List on the Title Page, as authors, one or more persons or entities
responsible for authorship of the modifications in the Modified
Version, together with at least five of the principal authors of the
Document (all of its principal authors, if it has fewer than five),
unless they release you from this requirement.

@item
State on the Title page the name of the publisher of the Modified
Version, as the publisher.

@item
Preserve all the copyright notices of the Document.

@item
Add an appropriate copyright notice for your modifications adjacent to
the other copyright notices.

@item
Include, immediately after the copyright notices, a license notice
giving the public permission to use the Modified Version under the
terms of this License, in the form shown in the Addendum below.

@item
Preserve in that license notice the full lists of Invariant Sections
and required Cover Texts given in the Document's license notice.

@item
Include an unaltered copy of this License.

@item
Preserve the section Entitled ``History'', Preserve its Title, and add
to it an item stating at least the title, year, new authors, and
publisher of the Modified Version as given on the Title Page.  If
there is no section Entitled ``History'' in the Document, create one
stating the title, year, authors, and publisher of the Document as
given on its Title Page, then add an item describing the Modified
Version as stated in the previous sentence.

@item
Preserve the network location, if any, given in the Document for
public access to a Transparent copy of the Document, and likewise the
network locations given in the Document for previous versions it was
based on.  These may be placed in the ``History'' section.  You may
omit a network location for a work that was published at least four
years before the Document itself, or if the original publisher of the
version it refers to gives permission.

@item
For any section Entitled ``Acknowledgements'' or ``Dedications'',
Preserve the Title of the section, and preserve in the section all the
substance and tone of each of the contributor acknowledgements and/or
dedications given therein.

@item
Preserve all the Invariant Sections of the Document, unaltered in
their text and in their titles.  Section numbers or the equivalent are
not considered part of the section titles.

@item
Delete any section Entitled ``Endorsements''.  Such a section may not
be included in the Modified Version.

@item
Do not retitle any existing section to be Entitled ``Endorsements'' or
to conflict in title with any Invariant Section.

@item
Preserve any Warranty Disclaimers.
@end enumerate

If the Modified Version includes new front-matter sections or
appendices that qualify as Secondary Sections and contain no material
copied from the Document, you may at your option designate some or all
of these sections as invariant.  To do this, add their titles to the
list of Invariant Sections in the Modified Version's license notice.
These titles must be distinct from any other section titles.

You may add a section Entitled ``Endorsements'', provided it contains
nothing but endorsements of your Modified Version by various
parties---for example, statements of peer review or that the text has
been approved by an organization as the authoritative definition of a
standard.

You may add a passage of up to five words as a Front-Cover Text, and a
passage of up to 25 words as a Back-Cover Text, to the end of the list
of Cover Texts in the Modified Version.  Only one passage of
Front-Cover Text and one of Back-Cover Text may be added by (or
through arrangements made by) any one entity.  If the Document already
includes a cover text for the same cover, previously added by you or
by arrangement made by the same entity you are acting on behalf of,
you may not add another; but you may replace the old one, on explicit
permission from the previous publisher that added the old one.

The author(s) and publisher(s) of the Document do not by this License
give permission to use their names for publicity for or to assert or
imply endorsement of any Modified Version.

@item
COMBINING DOCUMENTS

You may combine the Document with other documents released under this
License, under the terms defined in section 4 above for modified
versions, provided that you include in the combination all of the
Invariant Sections of all of the original documents, unmodified, and
list them all as Invariant Sections of your combined work in its
license notice, and that you preserve all their Warranty Disclaimers.

The combined work need only contain one copy of this License, and
multiple identical Invariant Sections may be replaced with a single
copy.  If there are multiple Invariant Sections with the same name but
different contents, make the title of each such section unique by
adding at the end of it, in parentheses, the name of the original
author or publisher of that section if known, or else a unique number.
Make the same adjustment to the section titles in the list of
Invariant Sections in the license notice of the combined work.

In the combination, you must combine any sections Entitled ``History''
in the various original documents, forming one section Entitled
``History''; likewise combine any sections Entitled
``Acknowledgements'', and any sections Entitled ``Dedications''.  You
must delete all sections Entitled ``Endorsements.''

@item
COLLECTIONS OF DOCUMENTS

You may make a collection consisting of the Document and other
documents released under this License, and replace the individual
copies of this License in the various documents with a single copy
that is included in the collection, provided that you follow the rules
of this License for verbatim copying of each of the documents in all
other respects.

You may extract a single document from such a collection, and
distribute it individually under this License, provided you insert a
copy of this License into the extracted document, and follow this
License in all other respects regarding verbatim copying of that
document.

@item
AGGREGATION WITH INDEPENDENT WORKS

A compilation of the Document or its derivatives with other separate
and independent documents or works, in or on a volume of a storage or
distribution medium, is called an ``aggregate'' if the copyright
resulting from the compilation is not used to limit the legal rights
of the compilation's users beyond what the individual works permit.
When the Document is included in an aggregate, this License does not
apply to the other works in the aggregate which are not themselves
derivative works of the Document.

If the Cover Text requirement of section 3 is applicable to these
copies of the Document, then if the Document is less than one half of
the entire aggregate, the Document's Cover Texts may be placed on
covers that bracket the Document within the aggregate, or the
electronic equivalent of covers if the Document is in electronic form.
Otherwise they must appear on printed covers that bracket the whole
aggregate.

@item
TRANSLATION

Translation is considered a kind of modification, so you may
distribute translations of the Document under the terms of section 4.
Replacing Invariant Sections with translations requires special
permission from their copyright holders, but you may include
translations of some or all Invariant Sections in addition to the
original versions of these Invariant Sections.  You may include a
translation of this License, and all the license notices in the
Document, and any Warranty Disclaimers, provided that you also include
the original English version of this License and the original versions
of those notices and disclaimers.  In case of a disagreement between
the translation and the original version of this License or a notice
or disclaimer, the original version will prevail.

If a section in the Document is Entitled ``Acknowledgements'',
``Dedications'', or ``History'', the requirement (section 4) to
Preserve its Title (section 1) will typically require changing the
actual title.

@item
TERMINATION

You may not copy, modify, sublicense, or distribute the Document
except as expressly provided for under this License.  Any other
attempt to copy, modify, sublicense or distribute the Document is
void, and will automatically terminate your rights under this License.
However, parties who have received copies, or rights, from you under
this License will not have their licenses terminated so long as such
parties remain in full compliance.

@item
FUTURE REVISIONS OF THIS LICENSE

The Free Software Foundation may publish new, revised versions of the
@acronym{GNU} Free Documentation License from time to time.  Such new
versions will be similar in spirit to the present version, but may
differ in detail to address new problems or concerns.  See
@uref{http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/}.

Each version of the License is given a distinguishing version number.
If the Document specifies that a particular numbered version of this
License ``or any later version'' applies to it, you have the option of
following the terms and conditions either of that specified version or
of any later version that has been published (not as a draft) by the
Free Software Foundation.  If the Document does not specify a version
number of this License, you may choose any version ever published (not
as a draft) by the Free Software Foundation.
@end enumerate


@c
@c End of Document
@c

@node Concept Index,  , FDL, Top
@unnumbered Concept Index

@printindex cp

@contents
@bye
