A response file contains names of images or other response filenames.
Introduce response file names with an at-character (@samp{@@}).

Enblend and Enfuse process the list @var{INPUT} strictly from left to
right, expanding response files in depth-first order.  The following
examples only show Enblend, but Enfuse works exactly the same.

@table @asis
@item Solely literal filenames.
Example:
@example
enblend image-1.tif image-2.tif image-3.tif
@end example

The ultimate order in which the images are processed is:
@file{image-@/1.tif}, @file{image-@/2.tif}, @file{image-@/3.tif}.

@item Single response file.
Example:
@example
enblend @@list
@end example
where file@tie{}@file{list} contains
@example
img1.exr
img2.exr
img3.exr
img4.exr
@end example

Ultimate order: @file{img1.exr}, @file{img2.exr}, @file{img3.exr},
@file{img4.exr}.

@item Mixed literal names and response files.
Example:
@example
enblend @@master.list image-09.png image-10.png
@end example
where file@tie{}@file{master.list} comprises of
@example
image-01.png
@@first.list
image-04.png
@@second.list
image-08.png
@end example
@file{first.list} is
@example
image-02.png
image-03.png
@end example
and @file{second.list} contains
@example
image-05.png
image-06.png
image-07.png
@end example

Ultimate order: @file{image-@/01.png}, @file{image-@/02.png},
@file{image-@/03.png}, @file{image-@/04.png}, @file{image-@/05.png},
@file{image-@/06.png}, @file{image-@/07.png}, @file{image-@/08.png},
@file{image-@/09.png}, @file{image-@/10.png},
@end table


@c @menu
@c * Response File Format::        Definition of the files' format
@c * Syntactic Comments::          Control interpretation of response files
@c @end menu

@c @node Response File Format
@subsection Response File Format
@cindex response file, format
@cindex format of response file

Response files contain one filename per line.  Blank lines or lines
beginning with a sharp sign (@samp{#}) are ignored; the latter can
serve as comments.  Filenames that begin with an at-character
(@samp{@@}) denote other response files.
@ref{Table:response-file-format} states a formal grammar of response
files in @uref{http://@/en.wikipedia.org/@/wiki/@/Ebnf,
@acronym{EBNF}}.

@float Table,Table:response-file-format
@multitable {@var{response-file}} {::=} {abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyzabcdefghijklm}
@item @var{response-file}
@tab ::=
@tab @var{line}*
@item @var{line}
@tab ::=
@tab (@var{comment} | @var{file-spec}) [@samp{\r}] @samp{\n}
@item @var{comment}
@tab ::=
@tab @var{space}* @samp{#} @var{text}
@item @var{file-spec}
@tab ::=
@tab @var{space}* @samp{@@} @var{filename} @var{space}*
@item @var{space}
@tab ::=
@tab @samp{ } | @samp{\t}
@end multitable

@noindent
where @var{text} is an arbitrary string and @var{filename} is any
filename.

@caption{@acronym{EBNF} definition of the grammar of response files.}
@shortcaption{Grammar of response files}

@cindex response file, grammar
@cindex grammar, response file
@end float

In a response file relative filenames are used relative the response
file itself, not relative to the current-working directory of the
application.

@noindent
The above grammar might unpleasantly surprise the user in the
some ways:

@table @asis
@item Literal filenames
Inside a response file all filenames are treated as literals.  No
filename globbing or filename expansion is performed.  This is, for
example, the line
@example
img_*.tif
@end example
stands for exactly one file, called @samp{img_*.tif}.

@item Whitespace trimmed at both line ends
For convenience, whitespace at the beginning and at the end of each
line is ignored.  However, this implies that response files cannot
represent filenames that start or end with whitespace, as there is no
quoting syntax.  Filenames with embedded whitespace cause no problems,
though.

@item Only whole-line comments
Comments in response files always occupy a complete line.  There are
no ``line-ending comments''.  Thus, in
@example
# exposure series
img-0.33ev.tif # "middle" EV
img-1.33ev.tif
img+0.67ev.tif
@end example
only the first line contains a comment, whereas the second lines
includes none.  Rather, it refers to a file called
@w{@samp{img-@/0.33ev.tif # "middle" EV}}.

@item Image filenames cannot start with @samp{@@}
An at-sign always introduces a response file, even if the filename's
extension hints towards an image.
@end table

@cindex response file, force recognition of
If Enblend or Enfuse do not recognize a response file, they will skip
the file and issue a warning.  To force a file being recognized as a
response file add one of the following syntactic comments (see below)
to the @emph{first} line of the file.

@example
@group
# response-file: true
# enblend-response-file: true
# enfuse-response-file: true
@end group
@end example

@noindent
Finally, here is an example of a valid response file.
@example
@group
# 4\pi panorama!

# These pictures were taken with the panorama head.
@@round-shots.list

# Freehand sky shot.
zenith.tif

# "Legs, will you go away?" images.
nadir-2.tif
nadir-5.tif
nadir.tif
@end group
@end example


@c @node Syntactic Comments
@subsection Syntactic Comments
@cindex response file, syntactic comment
@cindex syntactic comment, response file

Comments that follow the format described in
@ref{Table:response-file-syntactic-comment} are treated as
instructions how to interpret the rest of the response file.

@float Table,Table:response-file-syntactic-comment
@multitable {@var{syntactic-comment}} {::=} {abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyzabcdefghijklm}
@item @var{syntactic-comment}
@tab ::=
@tab @var{space}* @samp{#} @var{space}* @var{key} @var{space}* @samp{:} @var{space}* @var{value}
@item @var{key}
@tab ::=
@tab (@samp{A} .. @samp{Z} | @samp{a} .. @samp{z} | @samp{-})+
@end multitable

@noindent
where @var{value} is an arbitrary string.

@caption{@acronym{EBNF} definition of the grammar of syntactic
comments in response files.}
@shortcaption{Grammar of syntactic comments}

@cindex syntactic comment, grammar
@cindex grammar, syntactic comment
@end float

Unknown syntactic comments are silently ignored.
