@float Table,Table:mask-template-characters
@table @code
@item %%
Produces a literal @samp{%}-sign.

@item %i
Expands to the index of the mask file starting at zero.

@samp{%i} supports setting a pad character or a width specification:

@display
@code{%} @var{PAD} @var{WIDTH} @code{i}
@end display

@var{PAD} is either @samp{0} or any punctuation character; the default
pad character is @samp{0}.  @var{WIDTH} is an integer.  Examples:
@samp{%02i} or @samp{%_4i}.

@item %n
Expands to the number of the mask file starting at one.  Otherwise it
behaves identical to @samp{%i} including pad character and width
specification.

@item %p
This is the full name (path, filename, and extension) of the input
file associated with the mask.

Example: If the input file is called
@file{/home/@/luser/@/snap/@/img.jpg}, @samp{%p} expands to
@file{/home/@/luser/@/snap/@/img.jpg}, or shorter: @samp{%p} @result{}
@file{/home/@/luser/@/snap/@/img.jpg}.

@item %P
This is the full name of the output file.

@item %d
Is replaced with the directory part of the associated input file.
@inforef{dirname,, coreutils.info}.

Example (cont.): @samp{%d} @result{} @file{/home/@/luser/@/snap}.

@item %D
Is replaced with the directory part of the output file.

@item %b
Is replaced with the non-directory part (often called ``basename'') of
the associated input file.  @inforef{basename,, coreutils.info}.

Example (cont.): @samp{%b} @result{} @file{img.jpg}.

@item %B
Is replaced with the non-directory part of the output file.

@item %f
Is replaced with the filename without path and extension of the
associated input file.

Example (cont.): @samp{%f} @result{} @file{img}.

@item %F
Is replaced with the filename without path and extension of the output
file.

@item %e
Is replaced with the extension (including the leading dot) of the
associated input file.

Example (cont.): @samp{%e} @result{} @file{.jpg}.

@item %E
Is replaced with the extension of the output file.
@end table
@caption{Special characters to control the generation of mask
filenames.}
@shortcaption{Mask template characters}
@end float
